# The four pillars of data governance and their building blocks

The proposed Data Governance Framework is organised around what the Open Data Institute (ODI, 2023) refers to as the four foundational pillars of data governance.[^2] These pillars are complementary and interwoven, and critical to ensuring that data in the social protection sector is accessible, accurate, complete, and secure to enable robust and effective programme operations. Each of the pillars consists of 'building blocks' that jointly make up the pillar's broad concept. The pillars are described briefly here (see Part 2 for a full discussion).

- **Pillar 1. Management:** Data management focuses on policies and procedures for efficiently and effectively collecting, processing, storing, and deleting data throughout its lifecycle. For this pillar, the building blocks consist of six critical stages of the data lifecycle (as formulated by Shah et al., 2021). They are: (i) planning, (ii) acquisition, (iii) processing, (iv) analysis, (v) sharing and usage, and (vi) archiving/erasure. Data management is critical and, if well done, supports reliable operations and brings about operational efficiency and regulatory compliance. It helps remove erratic policy implementation and non-compliance, which can trigger reputational risks.

- **Pillar 2. Quality:** Data quality deals with procedures and processes that ensure data is accurate, consistent, complete, and reliable. The building blocks of data quality are the DAMA-DMBOK2 (DAMA, 2017) set of six dimensions, namely: (i) completeness, (ii) accuracy, (iii) currency, (iv) consistency, (v) validity, and (vi) uniqueness. Data quality aspects may include accurate enumeration, data rectification, data quality assurance and control, and complete household listing. In the context of social protection, data quality enables better eligibility determination, operational efficiency, and compliance, ultimately improving public satisfaction. Poor-quality data can lead to mistakes in beneficiary selection, attribution of the wrong benefit package, and dissatisfaction with public services. Principles of good administration – including the right to be heard, a fair procedure, and duty of care – should not be undermined (see Enqvist, 2023 for a case study from Sweden).

- **Pillar 3. Access:** Data access focuses on policies and mechanisms that ensure authorised users can efficiently retrieve and use data while maintaining data security, personal data protection and privacy,[^3] and compliance. The pillar categorises the different users or consumers of the data according to their respective access levels. Accordingly, we formulate its building blocks as: (i) internal users, (ii) external users, (iii) the general public, and (iv) general considerations that cut across all. As social protection databases hold sensitive personal data, key considerations, such as referring to existing legislation around data privacy, first classifying the data according to sensitivity level, or conducting a data protection impact assessment before opening some of the data, are explored under this pillar. Data access management also helps to contain possible data breaches, foster transparency, and empower staff and institutions to leverage data effectively.

- **Pillar 4. Security:** Data security covers the measures and protocols implemented to protect data from unauthorised disclosure, as well as access to data, accidental or unlawful destruction, loss, alteration, and other threats. Any technical processes employed to collect, process, store, use or share data should employ robust security mechanisms, for which threshold guidelines need to be defined. Data security has four building blocks, all referred to as 'measures', in accordance with ISO 27000 (ISO & IEC, 2022), which are based on: (i) technical measures, (ii) organisational measures, (iii) physical measures, and (iv) people measures. In many settings, public sector entities must comply with personal data protection and security standards, but further security and safety measures can be built and ensure that data security is instituted right from the design of technologies and processes, which fosters trust.

Each of these four pillars is explored in Part 2 of this document. Further explanation of the building blocks, as well as more detailed information on levels 3, 4 and 5 of the Framework, is provided in the respective sections. Before turning to such in-depth discussion, it is worth understanding the overarching roles and responsibilities vis-a-vis data governance (Level 4), as these cut across the different Framework pillars.

[^2]: The four data governance pillars proposed by ODI are neither the only nor necessarily the most correct approach to structuring data governance. However, in the absence of a canonical alternative that applies in this context, it was selected to provide a simple and intuitive frame that provides structure without overwhelming non-technical audiences with unfamiliar concepts. In contrast, the DAMA Wheel of the DAMA-DMBOK2 (DAMA, 2017) has 10 components, some of which go beyond the scope of the present publication.

[^3]: The term data protection focuses more on the technical and organisational measures needed to secure personal data, privacy focuses on empowering individuals with control over their personal information and ensuring transparency and respect for individual rights. This publication refers to both simply as 'data protection'.
