# Step 5. Implement the plan: Project management and iteration

- **Execute the plan:** Careful scoping, profiling and planning exercises are the foundation of effective implementation. When those stages have been completed, it is time to convert well-laid plans into action. By this point, the core actors in each organisation should be aware of their position in the RACI matrix and their implementation responsibilities, the respective target dates for completion, and the resources needed for execution. Putting these resources to work should then turn policy intention into administrative reality.

- **Account for progress:** In view of the high impact of data governance on policy outcomes, the institutions that commit to developing their frameworks need to be held accountable. Open and transparent reporting of progress may be the simplest and most effective accountability mechanism. Mirroring the governance structure, reporting can occur at different frequencies. Depending on the length of the overall implementation cycle, monthly or bi-monthly technical meetings at the technical level can be organised by the secretariat to gather status updates from all stakeholders. Quarterly reports to the data governance council that provide an overview of major developments and challenges may be appropriate. Bottlenecks that may be resolved by high-level interventions, e.g. resourcing or competency issues, can be addressed in this avenue.

- **Update profiles (refer to Step 3):** On completion of each implementation cycle, all stakeholders should revisit their organisational profiles. Updates to the current profile show the evolution of data governance and provide a clear progress marker. A re-assessment of current status in areas untouched by reform initiatives is one side of this, and a re-consideration of gaps is the other. The latter is especially important, as it enables a maturity-style approach to continuous improvement that does justice to evolving data governance requirements and sets stretch targets for organisational capacity in this key area of modern public administration.

The iterative and recurring process outlined above provides practical advice towards implementing the Data Governance Framework summarised in Figure 1. The previous sections delved into the specific aspects and how it can be put in practice in general terms. The next part looks at some examples of how different countries have applied particular policy aspects of data governance in their contexts.

---

**Previous step:** [Step 4: Plan implementation](step-4-plan-implementation.md)
