# Concluding remarks

In striving for an accurate, fair, and user-friendly information system, data governance touches on a remarkably diverse range of policy questions. In an effort to move beyond general exhortations on good practice, this Framework proposes numerous implementation mechanisms across four pillars of data governance. As a number of these mechanisms need to be replicated by multiple stakeholders, a substantial resource commitment is required across the social protection sector to achieve good data governance. The reward of more responsive, reliable, and secure service delivery should make the investment worthwhile.

Although this Framework outlines a roadmap towards operationalisation, it is far from a detailed plan of action. Instead, it serves as a starting point for a social protection sector that wishes to build its governance standards. Adaptation to local conditions and the specification of detailed tasks are where the real work starts. Identification of superfluous parts, addition of missing components, adjustment to the policy context, and alignment with existing initiatives rules and regulations will go a long way towards putting a universal framework into terms that are relevant to a given country setting.

The institutional architecture of social protection sectors differs as widely as the programmatic scope of programmes. As such, careful consideration of the required data governance aspects goes beyond mechanism to the Framework's overall scope. Other policy designs than are implicit in this exposition will require adjustments, but the general principles of data governance, and even the bulk of implementation mechanisms, should be relevant across the diversity of real-world policy settings.

Although this document provides a starting point for a journey towards good data governance, the search for a conclusive endpoint would be a mirage. In the time it takes to implement a tailored version of this Framework, our conception of data governance may already have evolved to keep pace with developments in technology, policy, and society. Moving all institutions of the social protection sector onto a uniform compliance level would be challenging, and a data maturity approach may be a constructive recognition of the varying levels of capacity. And even for the most compliant institutions, such a maturity approach is an acknowledgement that continual adjustment and development are required to achieve – and maintain – good data governance in an evolving world. If this Framework can catalyse such a journey in even just one setting, then it will have achieved its objective of fostering good data for effective universal social protection.
